MAJOR FUNDING
FOR THIS PROGRAM PROVIDED BY
THE FORD FOUNDATION,
A RESOURCE
FORINNOVATIVE PEOPLE
AND INSTITUTIONS WORLDWIDE,
AND THE CORPORATION
FOR PUBLIC BROADCASTING.
ADDITIONAL FUNDING PROVIDED
BY THESE FUNDERS --
"ALL MEN ARE CREATED EQUAL."
"ALL MEN
ARE CREATED EQUAL."
IT'S THE LOFTY
AND REVOLUTIONARY IDEAL
AT AMERICA'S CORE.
YET IT WAS WRITTEN AT A TIME
WHEN SOME INHABITANTS
WERE HELD IN BONDAGE
AND OTHERS WERE BEING
DISPOSSESSED OF THEIR LANDS.
HOW DID AMERICAN SOCIETY
JUSTIFY UNEQUAL TREATMENT
BASED ON SKIN COLOR
AND NATIONAL ORIGINS?
HOW DID IT
RECONCILE THAT CONTRADICTION?
AMERICA CREATED A STORY,
A STORY OF RACE.
Man: RACE WAS NEVER JUST
A MATTER OF HOW YOU LOOK.
IT'S ABOUT HOW PEOPLE ASSIGN
MEANING TO HOW YOU LOOK.
Woman: WE HAVE THE IDEA THAT
IT'S SOMEWHERE WRITTEN IN STONE
THAT THERE ARE THESE
FUNDAMENTAL DIFFERENCES
BETWEEN HUMAN BEINGS.
WE DON'T REALIZE THAT RACE
IS AN IDEA
THAT EVOLVES OVER TIME,
THAT IT HAS A HISTORY,
THAT IT IS CONSTRUCTED
BY A SOCIETY
TO FURTHER CERTAIN POLITICAL
AND ECONOMIC GOALS.
Narrator:
CREATED OVER FOUR CENTURIES,
RACE HAS BECOME A POWERFUL
AND ENDURING NARRATIVE.
MOMENTS IN AMERICA'S PAST
REVEAL HOW THIS IDEA TOOK HOLD
AND BECAME THE LENS THROUGH
WHICH WE VIEW OUR WORLD.
THOMAS JEFFERSON,
A VIRGINIA SLAVEHOLDER,
PENNED THE REVOLUTIONARY WORDS
PROCLAIMING HUMAN EQUALITY
IN THE DECLARATION
OF INDEPENDENCE.
HE ALSO WROTE A LESSER KNOWN,
INFLUENTIAL DOCUMENT
"NOTES ON THE STATE
OF VIRGINIA."
WRITTEN IN RESPONSE
TO QUESTIONS FROM FRANCE
ABOUT THE AMERICAN COLONIES,
THE BOOK READS AS A KIND OF
SALES PITCH FOR AMERICA.
"NOTES ON THE STATE OF VIRGINIA"
WAS NOT ABOUT RACE.
BUT AMONG JEFFERSON'S
DESCRIPTIONS
OF RIVERS AND SEAPORTS,
MOUNTAINS AND CLIMATE,
HE EXPRESSED HIS VIEWS ON
THE INHABITANTS OF THE NEW LAND,
PEOPLE FROM AMERICA,
EUROPE, AND AFRICA.
I ADVANCE IT AS A SUSPICION
ONLY THAT THE BLACKS,
WHETHER ORIGINALLY
A DISTINCT RACE
OR MADE DISTINCT BY TIME
AND CIRCUMSTANCES
ARE INFERIOR TO THE WHITES
IN THE ENDOWMENTS
BOTH OF BODY AND MIND.
Man: IT IS POSSIBLE
TO MAKE THE ARGUMENT
THAT THOMAS JEFFERSON
IS THE FIRST PERSON
TO TRULY ARTICULATE A THEORY
OF RACE IN THE UNITED STATES.
AND IN EFFECT HE HAS TO DO SO.
HE HAS SAID IN
THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE
THAT WE ARE ALL CREATED EQUAL.
WELL, IF IN FACT
WE'RE ALL CREATED EQUAL
AND IF IN FACT WE'RE
ENTITLED TO OUR LIBERTY,
THEN HOW CAN HE
POSSIBLY OWN 175 SLAVES
AND GOING UP TO ABOUT 225 SLAVES
AT THE PEAK OF HIS SLAVEHOLDING?
Narrator: IN "NOTES,"
JEFFERSON'S WORDS APPEARED
TO JUSTIFY SLAVERY
AT A TIME WHEN MANY WERE
ADMONISHING THE FOUNDING FATHERS
FOR ESPOUSING FREEDOM
WHILE CONTINUING TO SUPPORT
A SYSTEM OF HUMAN BONDAGE.
Man: THE PROBLEM THAT THEY HAD
TO FIGURE OUT IS,
HOW CAN WE PROMOTE LIBERTY,
FREEDOM, DEMOCRACY
ON THE ONE HAND,
AND A SYSTEM OF SLAVERY
AND EXPLOITATION
OF PEOPLES WHO ARE NON-WHITE
ON THE OTHER?
AND THE WAY YOU DO THAT
IS TO SAY,
YEAH, BUT, YOU KNOW,
THERE'S SOMETHING DIFFERENT
ABOUT THESE PEOPLE.
THIS WHOLE BUSINESS
OF INALIENABLE RIGHTS,
THAT'S FINE, BUT IT ONLY APPLIES
TO CERTAIN PEOPLE.
Man: THE MOMENT WHEN WE
BECOME A NATION IS CRITICAL
FOR OUR UNDERSTANDING OF BOTH
AMERICAN NATIONALITY AND RACE.
WE ACCEPT THE NOTION THAT ALL
MEN ARE CREATED EQUAL,
BUT THEN PERHAPS
SOME OF THOSE PEOPLE
WHO ARE ENSLAVED
ARE NOT QUITE MEN.
THAT IS, WE'LL KEEP OUR IDEAS
OF AMERICAN NATIONALITY
BUT WE'LL WRITE CERTAIN PEOPLE
OUT OF THE HUMAN FAMILY.
Narrator: THE SUSPICIONS OF
BLACK RACIAL INFERIORITY
RAISED BY JEFFERSON
HAD EVOLVED OVER TIME,
SHAPED IN PART BY
AN INTENSE NEED FOR LABOR
IN THE AMERICAN COLONIES.
IN 1619, WHEN THE FIRST AFRICANS
ARRIVED IN VIRGINIA,
RELIGION AND WEALTH,
NOT PHYSICAL APPEARANCE,
DEFINED STATUS.
BLACKNESS AND WHITENESS
WERE NOT YET
CLEAR CATEGORIES OF IDENTITY.
THEY WERE MORE LIKELY
TO DISTINGUISH BETWEEN
CHRISTIANS AND HEATHENS
THAN THEY WERE BETWEEN PEOPLE OF
COLOR AND PEOPLE WHO WERE WHITE.
THEY REGARDED A PERSON'S
STATUS IN LIFE
AS SOMEHOW MORE FUNDAMENTAL
THAN WHAT COLOR THEY WERE
OR WHAT THEIR PARTICULAR
BACKGROUND WAS.
Man: THE DIFFERENT WAYS
IN WHICH THOSE HIERARCHIES
OF SOCIAL CLASS AND SOCIAL POWER
BECAME FILLED IN
WITH THE CONTENT
OF RACE SO THAT THE LOWEST CLASS
WOULD BE A BLACK CLASS
AND THE HIGHEST CLASS
WOULD BE SOME PARTICULARLY PALE
WHITE CLASS,
THAT WAS A VERY GRADUAL PROCESS.
Narrator: FOR THE FIRST 50 YEARS
IN THE AMERICAN COLONIES,
MOST OF THE LABORERS WERE
EUROPEAN INDENTURED SERVANTS,
MANY TOILING
ON TOBACCO PLANTATIONS
IN WRETCHED CONDITIONS.
WITH FEWER EUROPEANS
BRAVING THE TREACHEROUS JOURNEY
ACROSS THE ATLANTIC,
PLANTERS FACING
A POTENTIAL LABOR SHORTAGE
TURNED TO THE TRANS-ATLANTIC
SLAVE TRADE
AND GRADUALLY REPLACED
INDENTURED SERVANTS
WITH AFRICAN SLAVES.
Horton:
THEY FOUND WHAT THEY CONSIDERED
AN ENDLESS LABOR SUPPLY,
PEOPLE WHO COULD
BE READILY IDENTIFIED,
AND SO WHEN THEY RAN AWAY,
THEY COULDN'T JUST
MELD INTO THE POPULATION
LIKE NATIVE AMERICANS COULD.
PEOPLE WHO KNEW HOW
TO GROW TOBACCO,
TO GROW RICE --
FROM THEIR STANDPOINT
THE IDEAL LABOR SOURCE.
Narrator: COLONY BY COLONY,
NEW LAWS MADE SLAVERY PERMANENT
AND INHERITABLE
FOR BLACK PEOPLE.
AND FOR THE FIRST TIME,
THE WORD "WHITE,"
RATHER THAN "CHRISTIAN"
OR "ENGLISHMAN,"
BEGAN APPEARING
IN COLONIAL STATUTES.
TO AN EXTENT YOU COULD SAY
THIS WAS ACTUALLY
CONSCIENCE STRATEGY,
OR WHAT EXTENT IT WAS THE RESULT
OF A NUMBER OF UNTHINKING
DECISIONS THAT RESULTED IN THIS,
BUT IT DID BUTTRESS
A KIND OF SOCIAL STRUCTURE.
Narrator:
AS AFRICAN SLAVERY INCREASED,
LOWER CLASS EUROPEANS WON
NEW RIGHTS AND OPPORTUNITIES.
SOME EVEN BECAME OVERSEERS
AND BOUNTY HUNTERS,
RESPONSIBLE FOR POLICING
THE GROWING SLAVE POPULATION.
Fredrickson: THE ORDINARY WHITE
PEOPLE ARE NOT GOING TO BE
COMPLICIT IN THE SYSTEM UNLESS
THEY GET SOMETHING OUT OF IT.
MY BELIEF IS THAT PAYOFF
WAS IN A CERTAIN STATUS,
PRESTIGE, RECOGNITION,
EGO ENHANCEMENT,
THAT ORDINARY WHITE PEOPLE
COULD DERIVE FROM RACISM.
AND SO THERE WAS
A KIND OF BARGAIN STRUCK.
Kelley: MANY OF THE
EUROPEAN-DESCENDED POOR WHITES
BEGAN TO IDENTIFY THEMSELVES,
IF NOT DIRECTLY
WITH THE RICH WHITES,
CERTAINLY WITH BEING WHITE.
AND HERE YOU GET THE EMERGENCE
OF THIS IDEA OF A WHITE RACE
AS A WAY TO
DISTINGUISH THEMSELVES
FROM THOSE DARK-SKINNED PEOPLE
WHO THEY ASSOCIATE
WITH PERPETUAL SLAVERY.
SLAVERY BECAME IDENTIFIED
WITH AFRICANS.
BLACKNESS AND SLAVERY
WENT TOGETHER.
THAT GAVE THE WHITE AMERICAN
THE IDEA THAT AFRICANS WERE
A DIFFERENT KIND OF PEOPLE.
Woman:
THERE'S A RACIAL DIVIDE EMERGING
THAT PEOPLE BEGIN TO,
UM, SEE AS NATURAL.
AND THAT'S PART OF WHERE
THE IDEA OF RACE COMES FROM.
IT'S JUST IN THE TENDENCY
FOR PEOPLE TO SEE
EXISTING POWER RELATIONSHIPS
AS HAVING SOME SORT OF
NATURAL QUALITY TO THEM.
Narrator: BY THE TIME JEFFERSON
SAT DOWN TO WRITE
"NOTES ON THE STATE OF VIRGINIA"
IN 1781,
A PLANTATION ECONOMY
DEPENDENT ON SLAVERY
WAS DEEPLY ENTRENCHED.
SLAVERY HAD BECOME SO WIDESPREAD
THAT TO MANY WHITES
IT SEEMED THE NATURAL STATE
FOR BLACK PEOPLE.
BUT WHEN JEFFERSON TURNED HIS
ATTENTION TO INDIANS IN "NOTES,"
WHAT APPEARED NATURAL ABOUT THEM
WAS THEIR STATUS
AS A FREE PEOPLE,
BRAVE WARRIORS
PROTECTING THEIR LANDS.
THIS LED JEFFERSON TO SUSPECT
THAT INDIANS WERE NOT
MUCH DIFFERENT FROM EUROPEANS.
THEIR VIVACITY
AND ACTIVITY OF MIND
IS EQUAL TO OURS
IN THE SAME SITUATION.
WE SHALL PROBABLY FIND
THAT THEY'RE FORMED IN MIND,
AS WELL AS IN BODY,
ON THE SAME MODULE WITH
THE HOMO SAPIENS EUROPAEUS.
Fredrickson: THE ORIGINAL VIEW
OF THE INDIANS
WAS THAT THEY WERE NATURALLY
WHITE PEOPLE
AND THEY LOOKED SLIGHTLY BROWN
BECAUSE OF EXPOSURE TO THE SUN
AND BECAUSE OF THE WAY
THEY TREATED THEIR SKIN.
JEFFERSON FELT, AMONG MANY
PEOPLE AT THAT TIME,
FELT THAT THE INDIANS
WERE GOOD HUMAN MATERIAL.
AND THE PROBLEM WITH THEM WAS
NOT RACE BUT CULTURE,
THAT THE INDIANS WERE SAVAGES,
BUT THEY COULD BE CIVILIZED.
Narrator: JEFFERSON
AND HIS CONTEMPORARIES
WERE ALSO INFLUENCED BY EUROPEAN
ENLIGHTENMENT THINKERS,
WHO BELIEVED THAT
EDUCATION AND ENVIRONMENT
COULD IMPROVE PEOPLE.
BUT WHEN JEFFERSON
WROTE ABOUT THE INDIANS,
HE HAD LITTLE DIRECT CONTACT
WITH THEM.
MOST VIRGINIA TRIBES
HAD BEEN PUSHED WEST
OR KILLED OFF BY WAR
AND EUROPEAN DISEASES.
Man: THOSE IN DIRECT CONFLICT
WITH THE INDIANS,
THOSE WHO WERE CROSSING
THE MOUNTAINS
TO KENTUCKY OR TENNESSEE,
DIDN'T THINK OF THE INDIANS
IN AN ENLIGHTENMENT VIEW.
THEY THOUGHT OF INDIANS
AS SAVAGES
WHO WERE TRYING TO DESTROY
PEACEFUL SETTLERS COMING IN,
AND THOUGHT THEY SHOULD BE
DRIVEN OUT OR EXTERMINATED.
Man: THERE WAS
AN EVER-ENCROACHING
WHITE POPULATION
WHO WANTED OUR LAND.
AS A PEOPLE, WE WERE HUNTERS.
AS ANTHROPOLOGISTS
WOULD DESCRIBE US
AS HUNTERS AND GATHERERS.
WE SAW OURSELVES
AS EQUAL PEOPLE.
WE WERE FREE PEOPLE,
WE HAD ALWAYS BEEN FREE PEOPLE.
Narrator: MANY INDIANS FOUGHT TO
MAINTAIN THEIR FREEDOM AND LAND.
WITHIN A DECADE OF INDEPENDENCE,
WARS WITH FRONTIER TRIBES
LIKE THE SHAWNEE,
MIAMI, KICKAPOO, AND OTHERS
THREATENED THE STABILITY
OF THE YOUNG NATION.
Perdue:
THE UNITED STATES DECIDED
THAT THE CHEAPEST, EASIEST WAY
TO AVOID AN INDIAN WAR
ALONG ITS ENTIRE FRONTIER
AND ALSO TO ACQUIRE INDIAN LAND
WAS TO "CIVILIZE" THE INDIANS.
CIVILIZATION INCLUDED
CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
IT INCLUDED AN ENGLISH EDUCATION
AND COMMERCIAL AGRICULTURE.
IF YOU CAN CONVERT INDIANS
FROM HUNTERS INTO FARMERS,
IF YOU COULD CONFINE THEM
TO A SMALL ACREAGE,
THEN YOU WOULD HAVE
ALL THIS SURPLUS LAND
WHICH COULD OPEN
TO WHITE SETTLEMENT.
Allen: THE CIVILIZATION POLICY
WAS ACTUALLY DESIGNED TO
ASSIMILATE US INTO AMERICA.
IT WAS ULTIMATELY
TO MAKE US FARMERS,
TO LIVE LIKE
THE COLONISTS LIVED.
THE CIVILIZATION POLICY WAS
TO MAKE US BROWN WHITE MEN.
Narrator: IN "NOTES ON
THE STATE OF VIRGINIA,"
JEFFERSON IMPLIED INDIANS
COULD BE ASSIMILATED
INTO AMERICAN SOCIETY.
BUT HE DID NOT SUPPORT
ASSIMILATING BLACK PEOPLE.
HE WROTE OF DEEP-ROOTED
PREJUDICES
ENTERTAINED BY THE WHITES
AND OF PHYSICAL
AND MORAL DIFFERENCES
SEPARATING THE GROUPS.
Horsman: JEFFERSON SEEMS
TO HAVE THOUGHT ABOUT IT
AS A VIRGINIA PLANTATION OWNER
WHO HAS BEEN BROUGHT UP
AMONG SLAVES
AND WHO IN HIS HEART OF HEARTS,
I WOULD SUPPOSE,
FINDS IT DIFFICULT TO CONCEIVE
THAT THOSE SLAVES
ARE FULLY HIS EQUAL.
Narrator:
IT WAS THROUGH THOSE EYES
THAT THE MAN WHO WROTE
THE NATION'S CREDO,
"ALL MEN ARE CREATED EQUAL,"
PUT FORTH AS A SUSPICION ONLY
THAT THE BLACKS
"ARE INFERIOR TO THE WHITES
IN THE ENDOWMENTS
BOTH OF BODY AND MIND."
Berlin: THIS DIFFERENCE
IS NOT SIMPLY
A PRODUCT OF CIRCUMSTANCE,
IT'S NOT SIMPLY A PRODUCT
OF THE ENVIRONMENT,
BUT JEFFERSON BROACHES THIS
POSSIBILITY THAT IT IS SOMETHING
MUCH DEEPER, SOMETHING INNATE.
WE WOULD SAY IN
OUR OWN LANGUAGE --
JEFFERSON DIDN'T HAVE
THIS LANGUAGE --
WE WOULD SAY GENETIC.
BUT HE SAYS WE WILL NOT
BE ABLE TO KNOW THIS
UNTIL SCIENCE GIVES US
THE ANSWERS.
AND SO HE CALLS ON SCIENCE.
Finkelman: HE SETS AMERICAN
SCIENCE ON THE PATH
OF TRYING TO FIGURE OUT
WHAT IT IS SCIENTIFICALLY
THAT MAKES BLACKS
INFERIOR TO WHITES.
AND OF COURSE, IF THAT'S
THE QUESTION THE SCIENTIST ASKS,
THEN THAT'S THE QUESTION
THE SCIENTIST WILL ANSWER.
Horton: AND SO
FROM THAT MOMENT ON,
YOU START TO BUILD A CASE
THAT IS SPECIFICALLY GEARED
TO TELL THE WORLD THAT
THESE PEOPLE ARE DIFFERENT.
THEORIES OF RACE
ARE USED TO DO THAT.
Narrator: IN THE NEXT CENTURY,
AS THE NATION EXPANDED,
SO WOULD IDEAS
ABOUT HUMAN DIFFERENCE.
SCIENCE AND SLAVERY WOULD HELP
FOCUS THE NATION'S ATTENTION
ON THE NATURE OF BLACK PEOPLE.
BUT LAND WOULD PROPEL
NATIVE AMERICANS
INTO THE RACIAL SPOTLIGHT.
A RISING NATION SPREAD
OVER WIDE AND FRUITFUL LAND
TRAVERSING ALL THE SEAS
WITH THE RICH PRODUCTIONS
OF THEIR INDUSTRY,
ADVANCING RAPIDLY TO DESTINIES
BEYOND THE REACH OF MORTAL EYE.
Narrator:
THE HOPES EXPRESSED BY JEFFERSON
IN HIS FIRST INAUGURAL ADDRESS
WERE PARTIALLY REALIZED
TWO YEARS LATER, IN 1803,
WHEN THE UNITED STATES PURCHASED
THE LOUISIANA TERRITORY
FROM FRANCE, DOUBLING
THE SIZE OF THE COUNTRY.
Woman: JEFFERSON BELIEVED THAT
THE UNITED STATES
HAD A GREAT FUTURE
BECAUSE IT COULD
EXPAND THROUGH SPACE,
THAT THE AGRARIAN IDEAL
OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE
COULD BE MAINTAINED BY EXPANDING
THE COUNTRY WESTWARD.
Horsman: OBVIOUSLY THERE WERE
VERY BIG PROBLEMS WITH THIS.
THE LAND WAS NOT EMPTY.
ONE DID OVERRUN INDIANS.
Narrator: AT THE TIME
OF THE LOUISIANA PURCHASE,
DOZENS OF INDIAN TRIBES
POPULATED THE VAST NEW TERRITORY
WEST OF THE MISSISSIPPI.
AND SOME INDIAN NATIONS
LIKE THE CHEROKEE
STILL OWNED MASSIVE TRACTS
OF LAND IN THE SOUTHEAST.
Perdue: INDIANS IN THE SOUTH
LIVED IN THE REGION
IN WHICH WEALTH WAS VERY FIRMLY
GROUNDED IN LAND.
PLANTERS NEEDED LAND
ON WHICH TO GROW TOBACCO
TO GROW COTTON,
TO GROW OTHER STAPLE CROPS.
INDIANS OCCUPIED THAT LAND.
INDIANS OWNED THAT LAND.
AND CONSEQUENTLY,
INDIANS WERE UNDER CONSTANT
PRESSURE FOR THAT LAND.
Narrator: IN RESPONSE
TO THIS PRESSURE
AND DEFEATS ON THE BATTLEFIELD,
SOME TRIBES LIKE THE CHEROKEE
EMBRACED THE GOVERNMENT
CIVILIZATION POLICY
FIRST BEGUN IN THE 1790s.
THEY WOULD PUT TO THE TEST
JEFFERSON'S WORDS.
"WE SHALL ALL BE AMERICANS.
"YOUR BLOOD
WILL RUN IN OUR VEINS
AND WILL SPREAD WITH US
OVER THIS GREAT CONTINENT."
Perdue: MOST PEOPLE
CONSIDER THE CHEROKEES
TO BE THE GREAT SUCCESS STORY
OF THE CIVILIZATION POLICY.
THE CHEROKEES WERE ABLE
VERY QUICKLY
TO TRANSFORM,
AT LEAST ON A SUPERFICIAL LEVEL,
THEIR CULTURE.
THE CHEROKEES MADE
MANY ACCOMPLISHMENTS
THAT LED THEIR SUPPORTERS
TO PROCLAIM THEM TO BE
CIVILIZED INDIANS.
Narrator: ONE OF THE LARGEST
TRIBES IN AMERICA,
THE CHEROKEES HAD LIVED IN SMALL
VILLAGES IN PARTS OF WHAT IS NOW
KENTUCKY, VIRGINIA, TENNESSEE,
THE CAROLINAS, ALABAMA,
AND GEORGIA.
BY 1819,
THEY HAD SIGNED TREATIES
CEDING OVER 90% OF THEIR LAND
TO THE UNITED STATES.
WITH THE CIVILIZATION POLICY,
MANY CHEROKEES HAD SWITCHED
FROM BEING HUNTERS TO FARMERS.
SOME EVEN RAN PLANTATIONS
AND OWNED SLAVES.
THEIR CHILDREN LEARNED
CHRISTIAN RELIGION
AND ENGLISH
AT MISSION-RUN SCHOOLS.
A CHEROKEE ALPHABET WAS CREATED,
AND IN THE 1820s,
THE CHEROKEE NATION
BEGAN PUBLISHING
A BILINGUAL NEWSPAPER.
THEY ESTABLISHED A GOVERNMENT
AND CONSTITUTION
THAT WAS PATTERNED
AFTER THE UNITED STATES.
Allen: THE CIVILIZATION POLICY
WAS LOOKED ON
AS A TOOL FOR SURVIVAL.
WE BEGAN TO SEE THAT
THAT MIGHT BE THE ONLY WAY
FOR THE CHEROKEE PEOPLE
TO LIVE IN PEACE
WITH THE UNITED STATES,
NOT SO MUCH THAT WE WANTED
TO BECOME WHITE PEOPLE.
Malcomson: AS THE CHEROKEES
BECAME MORE AND MORE PROSPEROUS
ALONG MORE OR LESS CLASSIC
WHITE, SOUTHERN LINES,
THE NATURE OF WHITE GOVERNMENT
IN AMERICA WAS CHANGING.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
HAD TO APPEAL TO
A MUCH WIDER BASE OF
WHITE AMERICAN MEN
THAN IT HAD PREVIOUSLY
IN THE REVOLUTIONARY PERIOD.
ONE OF THE MAIN INTERESTS
OF THIS DEMOGRAPHIC
OF LESS WELL-OFF
WHITE AMERICAN MEN
WAS TO GET LAND
SO THAT THEY COULD BECOME
BETTER-OFF WHITE AMERICAN MEN.
THE MAIN RESULT OF THIS,
WHICH WAS FROM
THE WHITE POINT OF VIEW
AN EXPANSION OF DEMOCRACY
AND OF DEMOCRATIC REPRESENTATION
OF INCLUSION
OF MORE AND MORE PEOPLE
IN AMERICAN DEMOCRACY,
FROM THE INDIAN POINT OF VIEW
WAS THE GRADUAL EMPOWERMENT
OF EXACTLY THE POPULATION
WHICH WOULD LIKE
TO TAKE WHAT THEY HAD.
Narrator: EVERY YEAR MORE WHITE
SETTLERS ARRIVED IN GEORGIA,
SEEKING TO SETTLE
ON WHAT WAS STILL INDIAN LAND.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
HAD PROMISED TO REMOVE
ALL INDIANS FROM THE STATE
IN 1802.
BUT 25 YEARS LATER,
WITH THE CHEROKEES APPEARING
EVEN MORE ENTRENCHED,
GEORGIA'S LEGISLATURE
TOOK ACTION, ASSERTING,
"THE LANDS IN QUESTION
BELONG TO GEORGIA.
SHE MUST
AND SHE WILL HAVE THEM."
THE STATE HELD A LOTTERY
GIVING WHITES TITLE
TO CHEROKEE PROPERTY.
Perdue:
WHITES INVADED THEIR LAND.
THEY KILLED PEOPLE,
THEY STOLE THEIR PROPERTY.
THEY FORCED THEM
OUT OF THEIR HOUSES.
CHEROKEES WERE REALLY BEING
PRESSED FROM ALL SIDES,
IT SEEMED.
Narrator:
THE PRESSURE ON CHEROKEES
AND ALL EASTERN INDIANS
INCREASED IN 1828
WHEN ANDREW JACKSON
WAS ELECTED PRESIDENT
ON A PLATFORM CHAMPIONING
OPPORTUNITY FOR THE COMMON MAN.
REMOVING ALL INDIANS
EAST OF THE MISSISSIPPI
WAS CENTRAL TO HIS AGENDA.
Horton: WHEN JACKSON, WHO SPEAKS
OUT IN A KIND OF A POPULIST WAY,
SPEAKING FOR THE LITTLE GUY,
SPEAKING OUT AGAINST PRIVILEGE,
HIS LITTLE GUY, HIS CITIZEN,
IS INCREASINGLY
A WHITE MALE CITIZEN.
AS AMERICA IS BECOMING MORE
DEMOCRATIC FOR WHITE MALES,
IT IS BECOMING INCREASINGLY
MORE RACE-BASED.
IT'S BELIEVED THAT ONLY WHITE
PEOPLE CAN MAINTAIN THE LAND,
PRESERVE IT, PROTECT
THEIR OWN INDEPENDENCE,
AND THEN
USING THAT INDEPENDENCE,
HAVE SOME SORT OF FITNESS
FOR SELF-GOVERNMENT
THAT ENABLES THEM
TO BE PROPER CITIZENS.
Perdue: NATIONALISM BEGINS
TO BE, IN MANY RESPECTS,
EQUATED TO RACE.
PEOPLE BEGAN TO THINK
THAT NATIONS SHOULD
BE COMPOSED OF PEOPLE
WHO HAD INHERENT
QUALITIES IN COMMON --
THEY THOUGHT THE SAME WAY,
THEY BELIEVED THE SAME THINGS,
THEY SPOKE THE SAME LANGUAGE,
THEY LOOKED THE SAME.
AND THIS IS VERY CONTRADICTORY
TO THE ENLIGHTENMENT NOTIONS
OF A UNITED HUMANITY.
Narrator: THE CONFLICT BETWEEN
INDIAN REMOVAL
AND AMERICA'S FOUNDING IDEALS
SURFACED DURING
BITTER NATIONAL DEBATES.
IN A THREE-DAY SPEECH
TO HIS FELLOW CONGRESSMEN,
NEW JERSEY
SENATOR FRELINGHUYSEN ASKED,
"IF WE ABANDON THESE ABORIGINAL
PROPRIETORS OF OUR SOIL,
"HOW SHALL WE JUSTIFY IT
TO OUR COUNTRY?
HOW SHALL WE JUSTIFY
THIS TRESPASS TO OURSELVES?"
BUT MICHIGAN TERRITORY GOVERNOR
LEWIS CASS
PROVIDED A JUSTIFICATION,
ONE THAT USED RACE TO FOCUS
ON THE NATURE OF INDIANS,
RATHER THAN THE MORALITY
OF THEIR REMOVAL.
THEY HAVE RESISTED EVERY EFFORT
TO AMELIORATE THEIR SITUATION.
THERE MUST THEN BE
AN INHERENT DIFFICULTY
ARISING FROM
THE INSTITUTIONS, CHARACTER,
AND CONDITION OF
THE INDIANS THEMSELVES.
Narrator: THE INDIAN REMOVAL ACT
PASSED IN 1830.
WHEN SOME TRIBES,
INCLUDING THE CHEROKEES,
RESISTED REMOVAL,
PRESIDENT JACKSON'S RESPONSE
REFLECTED THE GOVERNMENT'S SHIFT
IN RACIAL THINKING
ABOUT THE INDIANS.
THEY HAVE NEITHER
THE INTELLIGENCE, THE INDUSTRY,
THE MORAL HABITS,
NOR THE DESIRE OF IMPROVEMENT
WHICH ARE ESSENTIAL TO
ANY CHANGE IN THEIR CONDITION.
ESTABLISHED IN THE MIDST OF
ANOTHER AND SUPERIOR RACE,
THEY MUST NECESSARILY YIELD TO
THE FORCE OF CIRCUMSTANCES
AND ERE LONG DISAPPEAR.
Allen: THE CHEROKEES
FELT BETRAYED
THAT WE WERE CONSIDERED SAVAGES.
JACKSON IS REMEMBERED
AMONG CHEROKEES
AS SOMEONE TO BE VILIFIED.
THE IDENTITY OF BEING INDIAN,
OR IN THIS CASE
OF BEING CHEROKEE,
WHICH THEY HAD BEEN TOLD
FOR DECADES TO ABANDON
AS PART OF THE PAST,
AS PART OF PAGANISM,
AS A RELIC OF PRIMITIVE TIMES,
THEY WERE NOW TOLD
WAS INHERENT IN THEM
AND THAT THEY SHOULD
IN SOME WAY EMBRACE IT.
THEY SHOULD NOT
BECOME LIKE WHITE PEOPLE,
THEY SHOULD PRESERVE THEMSELVES
AS INDIANS.
AND NOT ONLY THAT, THEY SHOULD
PRESERVE THEMSELVES AS INDIANS
A VERY LONG WAY AWAY.
Narrator: THE CHEROKEES
VIGOROUSLY FOUGHT REMOVAL
AGAINST RELENTLESS PRESSURE.
BUT FINALLY IN 1838,
THE UNITED STATES ARMY
FORCED THEM TO LEAVE THEIR HOMES
AT GUNPOINT.
ONE-FOURTH OF THE CHEROKEE
NATION DIED IN CAMPS
OR ON THE JOURNEY WEST
THAT BECAME KNOWN
AS THE "TRAIL OF TEARS."
BY 1840, MORE THAN 70,000
SOUTHEASTERN INDIANS
HAD BEEN RELOCATED
WEST OF THE MISSISSIPPI.
Guterl:
THE STORY OF THE CHEROKEE
AND THEIR ULTIMATE REMOVAL
WAS ALSO ABOUT WHO COULD BE
CIVILIZED AND WHO COULDN'T,
WHO COULD BE WHITE,
WHO COULD BE A CITIZEN
OF THIS COUNTRY
AND WHO COULD RESIDE
WITHIN ITS BORDERS.
AND AS THE COUNTRY MOVES WEST,
THAT QUESTION GETS ANSWERED
IN THE SAME FASHION
OVER AND OVER AGAIN.
Narrator: EIGHT YEARS
AFTER THE TRAIL OF TEARS,
AMERICA WENT TO WAR WITH MEXICO
TO ACQUIRE MORE LAND.
SUPPORTERS OF THE WAR
ARGUED THAT MEXICANS
WERE AN INFERIOR MONGREL RACE.
A POPULAR GUIDE FOR HOMESTEADERS
DESCRIBED THEM AS
"MERE INDIANS,
BARBAROUS SAVAGES WHO INTEND
TO HOLD THIS DELIGHTFUL REGION
AGAINST THE CIVILIZED WORLD."
WHEN THE WAR ENDED IN 1848,
THE UNITED STATES ANNEXED
ONE-THIRD OF MEXICO'S LAND.
Ngai: MOST WHITE AMERICANS
REALLY BELIEVED
THE WEST WAS FOR THEM
AND FOR THEM ALONE.
BUT THIS WAS PART OF THE WHOLE
PHILOSOPHY OF MANIFEST DESTINY,
OF WHAT IMPELLED
WESTERN EXPANSION
THROUGHOUT THE MIDDLE PART
OF THE 19th CENTURY.
THERE'S THIS IDEA THAT
THE WEST BELONGED
TO WHITE AMERICANS.
Narrator: AS THEY CONTINUED
THEIR EXPANSION WESTWARD,
SOME WHITE AMERICANS WOULD USE
SCIENCE TO JUSTIFY THEIR ACTIONS
AND SUPPORT THEIR BELIEF
IN RACIAL SUPERIORITY.
Bay: DURING THE 19th CENTURY
THERE WERE LOTS OF PUBLIC
LECTURES ON THE RACES OF MAN.
SCIENCE WAS, BECAUSE IT WAS NEW,
WAS SOMETHING PEOPLE
WERE AVIDLY INTERESTED IN.
SCIENCE IN THE 19th CENTURY
WAS EXPECTED
TO REVEAL ALL THE MYSTERIES
OF THE UNIVERSE.
Horsman: YOU EVEN SEE SPECIFIC
REFERENCES BY THIS PERIOD
WHERE THEY'RE SAYING "RACE IS
THE GREAT ISSUE OF THE AGE."
Narrator:
THE NATION'S INTEREST IN RACE
WAS MORE THAN IDLE FASCINATION.
IN THE 1840s,
THE QUESTION OF WHETHER SLAVERY
WOULD EXPAND TO NEWLY ACQUIRED
WESTERN LANDS
WAS BITTERLY DIVIDING THE NATION
AND FUELING ATTACKS ON SLAVERY.
Malcomson:
THERE WAS SIGNIFICANT MOMENTUM
TOWARDS THE ABOLITION
OF RACIAL SLAVERY.
BUT THERE WERE ALSO VERY STRONG
COUNTERVAILING TRENDS.
AND IN THE END,
THIS CREATED AN ENORMOUS TENSION
WITHIN WHITE SOCIETY
BECAUSE IT WAS CAUGHT
IN THIS CONTRADICTION
THAT WAS INESCAPABLE.
Bay: AS PEOPLE BEGIN
TO OPPOSE SLAVERY,
THE WHOLE QUESTION
OF WHAT THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN THE RACES IS
AND WHAT THE STATUS OF
BLACK PEOPLE SHOULD BE
BECOMES MORE DEBATED.
IN THE CONTEXT OF THIS DEBATE
OVER SLAVERY VERSUS
ANTI-SLAVERY,
IDEAS ABOUT RACE
REALLY FLESH OUT.
Narrator: IN 1846, 5,000 PEOPLE
GATHERED IN BOSTON TO HEAR
"THE PLAN OF CREATION
AND THE ANIMAL KINGDOM,"
THE FIRST AMERICAN LECTURE
BY RENOWNED SWISS NATURALIST
LOUIS AGASSIZ.
HIS METHODS VALUED OBSERVATION
OVER SPECULATION.
AGASSIZ WAS QUICKLY
PULLED INTO
THE SCIENTIFIC QUESTION
OF THE DAY --
ARE ALL PEOPLE,
NO MATTER
THEIR PHYSICAL FEATURES,
MEMBERS OF THE SAME
OR DIFFERENT SPECIES?
Finkelman: IT'S A DEBATE
BETWEEN PEOPLE WHO LOOK AT
THE BOOK OF GENESIS AND SEE WHAT
THEY CALL A SINGLE CREATION,
GOD CREATED ADAM AND EVE,
AND SCIENTISTS WHO SAY,
WELL, ACTUALLY THESE RACES
COULDN'T POSSIBLY
HAVE COME FROM THE SAME PLACE.
THERE MUST BE DIFFERENT
AND SEPARATE CREATIONS.
Narrator:
AGASSIZ ARRIVED IN AMERICA,
SUPPORTING THE THEORY
THAT ALL HUMANS WERE UNITED
IN A SINGLE CREATION.
BUT HE SOON BEGAN
TO RETHINK HIS POSITION
AFTER MEETING ONE OF AMERICA'S
MOST DISTINGUISHED SCIENTISTS,
SAMUEL MORTON.
A PHILADELPHIA PHYSICIAN,
MORTON OWNED THE WORLD'S LARGEST
COLLECTION OF HUMAN SKULLS,
AND HAD WRITTEN
TWO INFLUENTIAL BOOKS
DOCUMENTING WHAT HE CLAIMED
WERE INNATE DIFFERENCES
AMONG HUMANS.
ONE FOCUSED ON AMERICAN INDIANS.
Horsman: THE FOUNDATION WORK
WAS A WORK CALLED
"CRANIA AMERICANA,"
IN WHICH HE ARGUED THAT HE WAS
USING PURELY SCIENTIFIC METHODS
TO INVESTIGATE THE QUESTION
OF SKULL SIZE,
SKULL CAPACITY,
WHICH HAD IMPLICATIONS
FOR BRAIN SIZE,
WHICH HE THOUGHT WAS VITAL
IN HOW RACES PROGRESSED.
Finkelman: LO AND BEHOLD,
HE DISCOVERS
THAT WHITE AMERICAN MALES
ARE THE SMARTEST PEOPLE
ON EARTH,
FOLLOWED IN GRADATION
BY THE ENGLISH, THE FRENCH,
AND THEN OTHER EUROPEANS,
AND THEN
OTHER RACES, WITH BLACKS
ALWAYS ON THE BOTTOM.
CURIOUSLY SOME ENGLISH SCHOLARS
DO THE SAME THING,
THEY DISCOVER ENGLISHMEN ARE
ACTUALLY SMARTER THAN AMERICANS,
FOLLOWED BY FRENCH
AND OTHER EUROPEANS.
AND GUESS WHAT
THE FRENCH DISCOVER?
THAT THE FRENCH ARE
REALLY SMARTER THAN BOTH.
SOMEHOW HE MANAGED TO MAKE
SORT OF SYSTEMATIC ERRORS
IN FAVOR OF WHAT WAS
THE, YOU KNOW, THE SORT OF
UNDERSTOOD HIERARCHY
OF THE RACES OF THE DAY.
Man: SAMUEL MORTON DREW
WILD CONCLUSIONS
BASED ON VERY CAREFUL STUDYING
AND RANKING
OF THESE SKULLS.
I DON'T CARE HOW MANY TIMES
YOU MEASURE A SKULL
OR EVEN ANYTHING PHYSICAL
ABOUT AN INDIVIDUAL
OR A GROUP OF PEOPLE --
YOU CANNOT PREDICT
THEIR MORALITY,
THEIR BEHAVIOR,
THEIR ACHIEVEMENTS,
POTENTIAL FOR ACHIEVEMENT.
BUT THAT WAS WHAT WAS IMPORTANT
ABOUT THIS IDEA OF RACE
AT THE TIME.
Horsman: SOUTHERNERS WERE
ACTUALLY DELIGHTED
AT WHAT
THE SCIENTISTS WERE DOING.
THEY WERE HEARING
FROM, IF YOU LIKE,
NON-SPECIAL INTERESTS
THAT THERE WERE HUGE DIFFERENCES
BETWEEN THE RACES.
NOW THIS MEANT THAT THE SOUTH
BEGAN TO ARGUE
QUITE VIGOROUSLY
THAT THE BEST
SCIENTIFIC OPINION IS SAYING
THAT SLAVES CANNOT EXIST
WITHIN A FREE WHITE SOCIETY
AND THAT THEY ARE INFERIOR.
Finkelman: THE ULTIMATE DEFENSE
OF SLAVERY IS A RACIAL DEFENSE,
THAT BLACKS ARE INFERIOR
AND THEREFORE THEY ARE
READY-MADE SLAVES.
GOD CREATED THEM AS SLAVES.
Narrator: "WHY ALL THIS RANT
ABOUT NEGRO EQUALITY,"
ASKED JOHN CAMPBELL
IN HIS BOOK NEGRO-MANIA,
"SEEING THAT NEITHER NATURE
OR NATURE'S GOD
EVER ESTABLISHED
ANY SUCH EQUALITY?"
JOSIAH NOTT,
A SOUTHERN DOCTOR
AND DISCIPLE OF MORTON,
FIRMLY BELIEVED
THAT BLACK PEOPLE
WERE A SEPARATE SPECIES
AND USED SCIENCE TO WAGE
A VIGOROUS DEFENSE OF SLAVERY.
Horsman: THOUGH HE WAS
A GOOD DOCTOR --
I MEAN, FOR THE PERIOD --
AND WELL-REGARDED AS AN EXPERT
ON YELLOW FEVER,
HE IMMEDIATELY STARTS TO SHOW
FROM THESE VERY FIRST WRITINGS
THAT WHEN HE WRITES
ABOUT RACE,
HE THROWS OFF REALLY
ANY SCIENTIFIC REALISM AT ALL
AND WRITES FROM HIS PREJUDICES.
IT SEEMS SO EXAGGERATED,
IT LOOKS LIKE
THE PUBLICATION YOU'D GET
ON A SORT OF
A DIRTY LITTLE LEAFLET
THAT SOME FRINGE ORGANIZATION
HAS PUBLISHED,
AND YET IT'S ACCEPTED
SCIENTIFIC FACT FOR A TIME.
Narrator: AS THESE IDEAS
TOOK HOLD,
PRO-SLAVERY ADVOCATES ARGUED
THAT THE ENSLAVEMENT
OF BLACK PEOPLE
DID NOT VIOLATE THE DEMOCRATIC
SPIRIT OF AMERICA,
BECAUSE JEFFERSON'S TERM
"ALL MEN"
DID NOT SCIENTIFICALLY
INCLUDE BLACK PEOPLE.
IN 1850, LOUIS AGASSIZ,
BY THEN, HARVARD'S
MOST PROMINENT PROFESSOR,
TOLD HIS FELLOW MEMBERS
OF THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE
THAT, "VIEWED ZOOLOGICALLY,
THE SEVERAL RACES OF MEN
WERE WELL MARKED AND DISTINCT."
JOSIAH NOTT WROTE
TO SAMUEL MORTON,
"WITH AGASSIZ IN THE WAR,
THE BATTLE IS OURS."
Baker:
HERE WAS THE MOST OBJECTIVE,
THE PINNACLE
OF THE SCIENTIFIC MAN,
INFLUENCED BY AMERICAN RACISM,
AND WHO TRANSFORMED
HIS DEEPLY HELD BELIEF
IN THE UNITY OF MANKIND.
I THINK THAT SAYS,
MORE THAN ANYTHING ELSE,
THAT THE POWER OF
THE IDEOLOGY OF RACE
CAN CHANGE PEOPLE'S MINDS.
Narrator: THREE YEARS LATER,
AGASSIZ CONTRIBUTED A CHAPTER
TO A FORTHCOMING BOOK
COAUTHORED BY NOTT.
THE 738-PAGE "TYPES OF MANKIND"
WAS GREATLY ANTICIPATED.
IT PRESOLD
ITS ENTIRE FIRST EDITION.
Baker: "TYPES OF MANKIND"
WAS TREMENDOUSLY INFLUENTIAL.
IT WAS THE FIRST TIME
THAT SCIENTISTS PULLED TOGETHER
ALL OF THE RESEARCH
THAT JUSTIFIED THE ARGUMENT
THAT AFRICAN-AMERICANS,
NATIVE AMERICANS,
ASIANS, ET CETERA,
WERE DIFFERENT SPECIES.
NATIONS AND RACES,
LIKE INDIVIDUALS,
HAVE EACH
AN ESPECIAL DESTINY.
SOME ARE BORN TO RULE,
AND OTHERS TO BE RULED,
AND SUCH HAS EVER BEEN
THE HISTORY OF MANKIND.
NO TWO DISTINCTLY MARKED RACES
CAN DWELL TOGETHER
ON EQUAL TERMS.
Narrator: "TYPES OF MANKIND"
WAS ONE OF THE BEST SELLING
SCIENCE BOOKS OF ITS DAY.
AMONG THE FIRST TO BUY IT
WERE THE UNITED STATES
DEPARTMENTS OF STATE,
NAVY, AND TREASURY.
Horsman:
SCIENCE AND THE POLITICIANS
AND POPULAR OPINION
WELD TOGETHER IN A WAY
THAT IS EXTREMELY USEFUL
FOR BOTH.
THE POLITICIANS
AND THE GENERAL POPULATION
ARE VERY HAPPY TO HAVE
SCIENTIFIC VIEWS TO LEAN ON
WHICH SAY THAT THE FACT THAT
THIS SUCCESSFUL REPUBLIC
IS NOT DESTROYING INDIANS
JUST FOR THE LOVE OF IT,
THEY'RE NOT ENSLAVING BLACKS
BECAUSE THEY'RE SELFISH,
THEY'RE NOT OVERRUNNING
MEXICAN LANDS
BECAUSE THEY'RE AVARICIOUS
FOR LAND,
THAT THIS IS PART OF
SOME GREAT
INEVITABILITY OF SCIENCE,
OF REALLY THE WAY
RACES ARE CONSTITUTED,
THAT IS THE CAUCASIAN RACE,
AND EVEN CERTAIN BRANCHES
WITHIN THE CAUCASIAN RACE,
ARE SUPERIOR.
Hammonds: IT'S A WAY OF SORT OF
NATURALIZING A SOCIAL STRUCTURE,
WHICH EVERYONE UNDERSTOOD
AND CLEARLY SAW,
THAT THE "NEGRO,"
OR IN OTHER REGIONS
OF THE COUNTRY
THE NATIVE AMERICAN
OR THE CHINESE,
WERE AT THE BOTTOM
OF THE SOCIAL
AND POLITICAL HIERARCHY.
AND IF YOU CAN SAY THAT
THEY ARE
FUNDAMENTALLY
BIOLOGICALLY DIFFERENT,
THEN THEY SHOULD BE.
Narrator: IN THE 1857
DRED SCOTT CASE,
THE SUPREME COURT DECIDED THAT
PEOPLE OF AFRICAN ANCESTRY,
ENSLAVED OR FREE,
COULD NEVER BECOME CITIZENS
OF THE UNITED STATES.
THE OPINION STATED
THAT BLACK PEOPLE HAD NO RIGHTS
WHICH THE WHITE MAN
WAS BOUND TO RESPECT.
Horsman: THERE'S BEEN
A REMARKABLE TRANSFORMATION,
BECAUSE IF YOU'RE THINKING,
SAY, 50 OR 60 YEARS BEFORE
IN AMERICAN HISTORY,
YOU'VE GOT JEFFERSON
AMBIGUOUSLY TALKING ABOUT,
WELL, HE THINKS POSSIBLY
BLACKS ARE NOT QUITE
OF THE SAME CAPACITY AS WHITES
BUT HE ISN'T SURE.
BUT THEY GET TO THE 1850s,
PEOPLE ARE WRITING,
THERE ARE DEEP, IRREVOCABLE
GULFS BETWEEN THE RACES.
Narrator: THE CONFLICT OVER
SLAVERY LED THE NATION TO WAR.
AFTER PRESIDENT LINCOLN SIGNED
THE EMANCIPATION PROCLAMATION,
HIS ADMINISTRATION CONSULTED
LOUIS AGASSIZ
ON HOW TO DEAL WITH THE NEWLY
FREED BLACK POPULATION.
AGASSIZ ADVISED,
"BEWARE OF HOW WE GIVE
TO THE BLACKS RIGHTS
"BY VIRTUE OF WHICH
"THEY MAY ENDANGER
THE PROGRESS OF WHITES.
THEY ARE INCAPABLE OF LIVING ON
A FOOTING OF SOCIAL EQUALITY."
Horton: IF AMERICA HAD JUST
LOOKED THE WORLD IN THE EYE
AND SAID, "WE HOLD THESE PEOPLE
IN SLAVERY
"BECAUSE WE NEED THEIR LABOR
AND WE'VE GOT THE POWER
TO DO IT,"
NOW, THAT WOULD HAVE BEEN
MUCH BETTER
BECAUSE THEN WHEN
THE POWER WAS GONE,
WHEN SLAVERY IS OVER, IT'S OVER.
BUT WHAT WE SAID WAS, THERE'S
SOMETHING ABOUT THESE PEOPLE.
BY DOING THAT, IT MEANS THAT
WHEN SLAVERY IS OVER,
THAT RATIONALIZATION
FOR SLAVERY REMAINS.
Narrator: IN THE LATE
19th CENTURY
AS THE UNITED STATES EXPANDED
BEYOND ITS CONTINENTAL BORDERS,
IDEAS OF RACIAL DIFFERENCE WOULD
BECOME WIDELY ACCEPTED AT HOME
AND HELP DEFINE A NEW ROLE
FOR AMERICA ABROAD.
AT THE TURN OF THE CENTURY,
POPULAR CULTURE
PROMOTED STORIES OF RACE
AS A UNIFYING FORCE
OF NATIONAL IDENTITY.
RACE WAS A COMMON TOPIC
IN THE NEW MONTHLY MAGAZINES.
Baker: A WHOLE NEW
MIDDLE CLASS READERSHIP
WAS INTERESTED
IN READING ABOUT IT.
THEY HAD PEOPLE FROM
THE HOUSE OR REPRESENTATIVES,
SUPREME COURT JUSTICES,
EXPERTS, SCIENTISTS,
WRITING IN THESE MAGAZINES
PURPORTING THEIR PARTICULAR
VISIONS AND VIEWS
ON THE SO-CALLED RACE QUESTION,
THE INDIAN QUESTION,
THE NEGRO QUESTION.
PEOPLE CONSUMED IT WITHOUT EVEN
UNDERSTANDING THE SCIENCE
THAT WENT BEHIND IT,
THAT, HEY,
IF THIS EXPERT'S
TALKING ABOUT RACE
IN THE NORTH AMERICAN REVIEW,
IT MUST BE CORRECT.
Guterl: POPULAR MAGAZINES
CONTRIBUTE TO AN EMERGING SENSE
OF WHAT IS
AND WHAT ISN'T AMERICAN.
WHO'S WHITE, WHO'S NOT,
WHO'S BETTER, WHO'S WORSE?
Man: THE UNIFYING PRINCIPLE
IS A PRINCIPLE OF, UM,
WHITE SUPREMACY.
IT'S A PRINCIPLE OF
SHARED RACIAL IDENTITY.
AND IF YOU ARE WHITE
OR IF YOU CAN MADE TO IDENTIFY
WITH WHITENESS,
YOU ARE GOING TO BE CONSIDERED
TO BE IN.
AND THAT LINE OF WHITENESS
CUTS ACROSS CLASS LINES
AND PROVIDES A WAY TO UNIFY
AMERICANS ON THE BASIS OF RACE.
Horton: ALL THROUGH
THE LATE 19th CENTURY,
THERE IS THIS CONSTANT MESSAGE
HAMMERED AT POOR WHITE PEOPLE --
YOU MAY BE POOR,
YOU MAY HAVE MISERABLE LIVES
RIGHT NOW,
BUT THE THING THAT'S
MOST IMPORTANT,
THE THING WE WANT YOU
TO FOCUS ON
IS THE FACT THAT YOU'RE WHITE.
Narrator:
IN 1898, THE UNITED STATES
TOOK POSSESSION OF GUAM,
PUERTO RICO, CUBA,
AND THE PHILIPPINES
AFTER DEFEATING SPAIN IN WAR.
WHEN McCLURE'S MAGAZINE
PUBLISHED THE POEM
"THE WHITE MAN'S BURDEN,"
AMERICANS SEIZED ON THE PHRASE
THAT EMBODIED THE COUNTRY'S
NEW ROLE AS A WORLD POWER.
RUDYARD KIPLING'S POEM
WAS A RALLYING CRY FOR EMPIRE
AND A RACIAL JUSTIFICATION
TO SEND AMERICAN TROOPS
ACROSS THE PACIFIC
TO PUT DOWN
THE FILIPINO REBELS
FIGHTING FOR INDEPENDENCE
FROM THE U.S.
TAKE UP THE WHITE MAN'S BURDEN,
SEND FORTH THE BEST YE BREED,
GO, BIND YOUR SONS TO EXILE,
TO SERVE YOUR CAPTIVES' NEED.
TO WAIT IN HEAVY HARNESS,
ON FLUTTERED FOLK AND WILD
YOUR NEW-CAUGHT
SULLEN PEOPLES,
HALF-DEVIL AND HALF-CHILD.
Fredrickson: KIPLING WROTE
THE POEM TO TRY TO
ENCOURAGE THE UNITED STATES
TO ANNEX THE PHILIPPINES.
AND CLEARLY IT PROBABLY
PROVIDED MORE SUPPORT
FOR THOSE WHO WANTED TO TAKE ON
THE WHITE MAN'S BURDEN.
BECAUSE OF SOME OF
THE IMPERIALISTS SAID,
"OH, WE CAN BRING THEM ALONG,
MAYBE NOT TO EQUALITY,
"BUT OUR LITTLE BROWN BROTHERS,
WE CAN ADVANCE THEM
IN CIVILIZATION."
Narrator: EVEN ADVERTISING
TOOK UP THE PHRASE.
PEARS' SOAP CLAIMED TO BE
"A POTENT FACTOR IN BRIGHTENING
THE DARK CORNERS OF THE EARTH
AS CIVILIZATION ADVANCES."
NOT ALL AMERICANS SUPPORTED
THE PHILIPPINE WAR,
BUT RACE FUELED THE ARGUMENTS OF
MANY ANTI-IMPERIALISTS AS WELL.
ONE SOUTHERN SENATOR DECLARED,
"WE OF THE SOUTH HAVE BORNE
THIS WHITE MAN'S BURDEN
"OF A COLORED RACE IN OUR MIDST
"SINCE THEIR EMANCIPATION
AND BEFORE.
"IT WAS A BURDEN
UPON OUR MANHOOD
"AND OUR IDEAS OF LIBERTY
BEFORE THEY WERE EMANCIPATED.
IT IS STILL A BURDEN."
Rydell: IF YOU LOOK AT THE WAY
FILIPINOS ARE REPRESENTED,
THEY ARE REPRESENTED
NOT AS FILIPINOS.
SOME FILIPINOS ARE PORTRAYED AS
BEING AKIN TO AFRICAN-AMERICANS.
SOME ARE PORTRAYED AS BEING
AKIN TO NATIVE AMERICANS.
Guterl: USE OF THE IMAGERY
OF AFRICAN-AMERICANS
AND NATIVE AMERICANS
WOULD HAVE BEEN IMPORTANT
BECAUSE THESE WERE
FAMILIAR PEOPLES.
THEIR FAULTS WERE FAMILIAR TO
THE CITIZENS OF THE REPUBLIC.
Hammonds: AT THE END OF
THE 19th CENTURY,
RACE IS A KIND OF
INTEGRATED TOTALITY,
IT EMBODIED THESE SORT OF
CULTURAL, LINGUISTIC,
PSYCHOLOGICAL, MORAL,
AND BIOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS
INTO THE CONCEPT ITSELF.
THE CONCEPT IS QUITE RICH.
IT CARRIES ALL THESE KINDS
OF CONNOTATIONS.
THERE'S NOT A GAP BETWEEN WHAT
THE REGULAR PERSON ON THE STREET
UNDERSTANDS ABOUT RACE AND WHAT
SCIENTISTS OR ANTHROPOLOGISTS
OR SOCIAL SCIENTISTS
THINK ABOUT RACE.
Narrator: AMERICA CRUSHED
THE FILIPINO
INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENT,
AND THE PHILIPPINES BECAME
A U.S. TERRITORY.
THE UNITED STATES GAINED
A STRATEGIC PORT IN THE PACIFIC
AND BEGAN A CAMPAIGN TO CIVILIZE
ANOTHER SET OF NATIVES.
AMERICA ENTERED THE 20th CENTURY
AS THE WORLD'S
MOST PROSPEROUS NATION
AND NEWEST EMPIRE.
IN 1904, ST. LOUIS, MISSOURI
STAGED A WORLD'S FAIR TO
SHOWCASE AMERICA'S ACHIEVEMENTS
AND CELEBRATE
THE 100th ANNIVERSARY
OF THOMAS JEFFERSON'S
LOUISIANA PURCHASE.
Baker: THE 1904 WORLD'S FAIR
WAS AMERICA'S TRIUMPH
OF CIVILIZATION,
IMPERIALISM, AND A NEW CENTURY.
IT WAS FILLED WITH HOPE
AND OPTIMISM.
THE ORGANIZERS WANTED
TO SHOW AMERICA'S
UNBRIDLED PROGRESS.
Rydell: PEOPLE GO TO HAVE FUN,
TO BE SURE.
BUT WORLD'S FAIRS
ARE NOT ABOUT ENTERTAINMENT.
THEY'RE BILLED AS
WORLD'S UNIVERSITIES.
Narrator: IN NEOCLASSIC
PALACES OF PROGRESS,
FAIRGOERS WANDERED THROUGH
TECHNOLOGICAL
AND CULTURAL EXHIBITS.
BUT ON THE OTHER SIDE
OF THE FAIRGROUNDS,
THEY WERE CAPTIVATED
BY HUMAN EXHIBITS,
PEOPLE ON DISPLAY IN THEIR
SO-CALLED NATURAL HABITATS.
Hammonds: THEY WOULD HAVE THESE
EXHIBITS OF LITTLE BROWN PEOPLE
TO SHOW, "OH, THAT'S A SAVAGE.
HMM, LOOK AT THE WAY
THEY CARVE THAT WOOD."
AND THE BARBARIANS, AS YOU MOVED
UP THE EVOLUTIONARY TREE,
"OH, ISN'T THAT INTERESTING.
I SEE IT'S DIFFERENT
THAN THE SAVAGES."
Rydell: FAIRGOERS SEE
AN ENORMOUS NUMBER OF PEOPLE
WHO PERHAPS THEY'VE
ONLY READ ABOUT,
MAYBE EVEN NEVER HEARD ABOUT.
BUT HERE THEY ARE, LIVING FLESH
AND BLOOD, THERE TO BE SEEN.
WORLD'S FAIRS ARE VERY ADEPT
AT ORGANIZING
CATEGORIES OF HUMAN BEINGS
ON THIS CONTINUUM,
FROM SAVAGERY TO CIVILIZATION.
Narrator: ONE FAIR ORGANIZER
DESCRIBED IT AS
"A PRACTICAL ILLUSTRATION
OF THE BEST WAY OF BEARING
THE WHITE MAN'S BURDEN."
ON DISPLAY FOR ALL TO SEE
WERE THE SUBJUGATED PEOPLE
OF AMERICA'S RECENT PAST.
AN EXHIBIT TITLED
"OLD PLANTATION"
SERVED UP A BUCOLIC VIEW
OF SLAVE LIFE.
AND GERONIMO, THE LEGENDARY
AND RECENTLY DEFEATED
APACHE WARRIOR
SIGNED AUTOGRAPHS FOR A FEE.
Rydell: HERE YOU HAVE NOT ONLY
AMERICAN INDIANS PUT ON DISPLAY
AS A KIND OF VANQUISHED PEOPLE,
BUT YOU ALSO HAVE AT THE FAIR
A DIRECT LINK MADE
BETWEEN MANIFEST DESTINY
ON THE HOME FRONT
AND AMERICA'S BURGEONING DRIVE
TO EXPAND OVERSEAS.
Narrator:
THE PHILIPPINE EXPOSITION
WAS ONE OF THE LARGEST
AND MOST POPULAR EXHIBITS.
CREATED TO DEMONSTRATE
THE BENEFITS
OF AMERICA'S
CIVILIZING PRESENCE,
THE EXHIBIT GAVE AMERICANS
A CHANCE TO SEE
THE PEOPLE THEY
RECENTLY CONQUERED.
Baker: PART OF THE WORLD'S FAIR
WAS ALSO ABOUT
SHOWING WHERE YOU WERE
AS A WHITE CITIZEN.
AND A LOT OF PEOPLE
TOOK PICTURES
NEXT TO THE SO-CALLED SAVAGES.
AND HAVING A WHITE BODY
NEXT TO A DARK BODY
DEMONSTRATED HOW CIVILIZED
THEY WERE.
Narrator: NEARLY 20 MILLION
VISITORS TO THE FAIR
RECEIVED AN OBJECT LESSON
THAT CONNECTED
AN UNDERSTANDING OF RACE
TO A VISION OF AMERICA'S FUTURE.
Rydell: ONE OF THE METAPHORS
THAT'S CONSTANTLY USED
OVER AND OVER AGAIN AT THE FAIR
IS THE METAPHOR OF THE HIGHWAY
OF HUMAN PROGRESS.
WHO'S IN THE FAST LANE?
ARE YOU PART OF THIS ADVANCING
ORDER OF CAUCASIANS,
OR ARE YOU SOMEBODY ELSE,
SOMEBODY OTHER?
Malcomson: WHITE PEOPLE
SAW THEIR ADVANCE
AS BEING HISTORICAL.
AND THIS GAVE THEM
AN ENORMOUS MOTIVATION
TO SEE THE LIVES OF PEOPLE
WHO WERE NOT WHITE
AS BEING OUTSIDE OF HISTORY
AND NOT PART OF THIS
PROGRESSIVE ADVANCE.
Guterl: MOST AMERICANS BELIEVED
THAT RACE WAS
ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT PARTS
OF NATIONAL LIFE,
THAT RACE MATTERED BECAUSE
IT GUARANTEED THIS COUNTRY
A FUTURE IN THE HISTORY
OF THE WORLD.
THE UNITES STATES WOULD
RISE TOWARDS GLORY,
TOWARDS HISTORY,
TOWARDS ITS DESTINY.
Narrator: AFTER SIX MONTHS,
THE ST. LOUIS WORLD'S FAIR
CLOSED ON DECEMBER 1, 1904,
ITS GRAND EXHIBIT HALLS
DEMOLISHED SOON AFTER.
BUT RACE,
A STORY FIRST TOLD
TO RATIONALIZE DEEP
SOCIAL DIVISIONS
IN A SOCIETY THAT PROCLAIMED
ITS BELIEF IN EQUALITY,
WOULD BE CARRIED FORWARD
INTO THE 20th CENTURY
AND BEYOND.
Horton: WE ARE A SOCIETY
BASED ON PRINCIPLES
LITERALLY TO DIE FOR,
PRINCIPLES THAT ARE SO WONDERFUL
IT BRINGS TEARS TO YOUR EYES.
BUT WE'RE A SOCIETY
THAT SO OFTEN
ALLOWS ITSELF TO
IGNORE THOSE PRINCIPLES.
WE LIVE IN A KIND OF HEIGHTENED
STATE OF ANXIETY
BECAUSE WE KNOW WE AREN'T
WHAT WE COULD BE
OR WHAT WE SAY WE ARE.
HOW DO WE CONTINUE
TO CREATE RACE TODAY?
FIND OUT IN THE NEXT EPISODE
OF "RACE:
THE POWER OF AN ILLUSION."
TO LEARN MORE
ABOUT RETHINKING RACE,
VISIT PBS ONLINE
AT pbs.org.
TO ORDER THE VIDEO SET
OF "RACE: THE POWER
OF AN ILLUSION,"
CALL...
MAJOR FUNDING
FOR THIS PROGRAM PROVIDED BY
THE FORD FOUNDATION,
A RESOURCE
FOR INNOVATIVE PEOPLE
AND INSTITUTIONS WORLDWIDE,
AND THE CORPORATION
FOR PUBLIC BROADCASTING.
ADDITIONAL FUNDING
PROVIDED BY THESE FUNDERS --